You needn’t think I’m crazy, Eliot—plenty of others have queerer prejudices than this. 
Why don’t you laugh at Oliver’s grandfather, who won’t ride in a motor? If I don’t like that damned subway, 
it’s my own business; and we got here more quickly anyhow in the taxi. 
We’d have had to walk up the hill from Park Street if we’d taken the car. 
I know I’m more nervous than I was when you saw me last year, but you don’t need to hold a clinic over it. 
There’s plenty of reason, God knows, and I fancy I’m lucky to be sane at all. 
Why the third degree? You didn’t use to be so inquisitive.
Well, if you must hear it, I don’t know why you shouldn’t. 
Maybe you ought to, anyhow, for you kept writing me like a grieved parent when you heard I’d begun to 
cut the Art Club and keep away from Pickman. 
Now that he’s disappeared I go around to the club once in a while, but my nerves aren’t what they were.
No, I don’t know what’s become of Pickman, and I don’t like to guess. 
You might have surmised I had some inside information when I dropped him—and that’s why 
I don’t want to think where he’s gone. 
Let the police find what they can—it won’t be much, judging from the fact that they don’t know yet of the 
old North End place he hired under the name of Peters. 
I’m not sure that I could find it again myself—not that I’d ever try, even in broad daylight! Yes, 
I do know, or am afraid I know, why he maintained it. I’m coming to that. 
And I think you’ll understand before I’m through why I don’t tell the police. They would ask me to guide them, 
but I couldn’t go back there even if I knew the way. 
There was something there—and now I can’t use the subway or (and you may as well have your laugh at this, too) 
go down into cellars any more.
I should think you’d have known I didn’t drop Pickman for the same silly reasons that fussy old women like 
Dr. Reid or Joe Minot or Bosworth did. 
Morbid art doesn’t shock me, and when a man has the genius Pickman had I feel it an honour to know him, 
no matter what direction his work takes. 
Boston never had a greater painter than Richard Upton Pickman. I said it at first and I say it still, 
and I never swerved an inch, either, when he shewed that “Ghoul Feeding”. 
That, you remember, was when Minot cut him.
You know, it takes profound art and profound insight into Nature to turn out stuff like Pickman’s. 
Any magazine-cover hack can splash paint around wildly and call it a nightmare or a Witches’ 
Sabbath or a portrait of the devil, but only a great painter can make such a thing really scare or ring true. 
That’s because only a real artist knows the actual anatomy of the terrible or the physiology of 
fear—the exact sort of lines and proportions that connect up with latent instincts or hereditary memories of fright, 
and the proper colour contrasts and lighting effects to stir the dormant sense of strangeness. 
I don’t have to tell you why a Fuseli really brings a shiver while a cheap ghost-story frontispiece merely makes us laugh. 
There’s something those fellows catch—beyond life—that they’re able to make us catch for a second. Doré had it. Sime has it. Angarola of Chicago has it. 
And Pickman had it as no man ever had it before or—I hope to heaven—ever will again.
Don’t ask me what it is they see. You know, in ordinary art, there’s all the difference in the world between 
the vital, breathing things drawn from Nature or models and the artificial truck that commercial small fry reel 
off in a bare studio by rule. 
Well, I should say that the really weird artist has a kind of vision which makes models, or summons up what 
amounts to actual scenes from the spectral world he lives in. Anyhow, he manages to turn out results that differ 
from the pretender’s mince-pie dreams in just about the same way that the life painter’s results differ from the 
concoctions of a correspondence-school cartoonist. 
If I had ever seen what Pickman saw—but no! Here, let’s have a drink before we get any deeper. 
Gad, I wouldn’t be alive if I’d ever seen what that man—if he was a man—saw!